MikMod Bug Report 17.9.2001 (Jan Lönnberg)

Version 2.2.x (current CVS tree)

Fixed bugs:
-----------

Problem:	Arpeggio ignores first data nibble.
Exhibited by:	Cybernd2.MOD
Fix:		Replace arpeggio routine references
		to shorts in control int with
		references to bytes.
Severity:	High

Problem:	Mikplay crashes on module change when
		declicker active.
Fix:		Reset declicker on sample unload.
Severity:	High

Problem: 	IT: Appears to retrigger envelopes on portamento
		even though Compatible Gxx is off.
Exhibited by:	JAN109.IT, TEST23.IT
Fix:		Retrigger envelopes on portamento only when
		Compatible Gxx is on.
Comment:	There was a comment in the code explaining
		what was missing! Something you forgot to do?
Severity:	Medium

Problem:	Note delay greater than pattern speed causes
		following rows to be ignored until next note
		delay command!
Exhibited by:	AQUA.S3M
Comment:	The lead gets stuck on the same note in order 21
		in Aquaphobia. Previously misdiagnosed as:
		"S3M: G00 ignored - portamento doesn't seem to
		have memory.".
Fix:		Reset note delay on each row.
Severity:	High

Problem:	IT: Portamento doesn't trigger notes if no note
		is playing.
Exhibited by:	JAN109.IT
Fix:		Retrigger notes on portamento if no note is
		playing (IT only, but _all_ modes).
Severity:	Medium

Problem:	IT: Doesn't restart notes when an attempt to
		play a note with carry is made and no note
		is playing.
Exhibited by:	TEST11.IT
Fix:		Restart envelopes if no note is playing, and
		actually play the note. Note that a note that
		has been faded out to zero and can't fade back
		in counts as no note playing in IT. The exact
		rules in IT for when a channel is turned off
		are arcane, and I'll discuss them only when
		necessary.
Severity:	Medium

Problem:	IT: Magnitude/speed of vol. column portamento
		too small.
Exhibited by:	TEST3C.IT
Fix:		Increase vol. col. porta speed x4.
Comment:	Compare the relative pitch of the final two
		notes; the difference is much larger in MikAmp
		than in IT.
Severity:	Medium

Problem: 	Auto-vibrato in log pitch mode accesses
		linear pitch slide table incorrectly.		
Exhibited by:	TEST4.IT, TEST27.IT
Fix:		Check pitch handling code?
Comment:	Autovibrato seemed to be too strong.		
		Misdiagnosed as a problem with pitch
		envelopes resetting.
		Serves you right for trying to be sneaky,
		Jake.
Severity:	Minimal

Problem:	IT: Cxx break to row never takes BCD
		parameter!
Exhibited by:	OCEAN4.IT, OCEAN4T.IT
Fix:		Always interpret Cxx parameter directly in
		IT.
Comment:	Cute. Cxx is _always_ hex in IT, not just
		with old effects off. Another Lim-induced
		compatibility problem.
Severity:	Medium

Problem:	IT: Ignores module stereo separation parameter.
Exhibited by:	OCEAN4.IT, OCEAN4T.IT
Fix:		Don't just ignore pan separation! Scale all
		panning values by pan separation/128 before
		feeding them to the mixer device.
Comment:	I don't believe second-guessing the composer
		is a good idea. Especially since it sounds
		horrible in places. Of course, the current
		behaviour could be an option, but I feel it
		messes up more modules than it improves.
Severity:	Low

Problem:	IT: Ignores stereo/mono bit in module flags.
Exhibited by:	WIZBALL2.IT
Fix:		Bit 0 in the module flags. If this is off,
		all channels should be centred at all times.
		I suggest you implement this by setting
		stereo separation to 0.
Comment:	See previous bug.
Severity:	Low

Problem:	IT: Vol. column pitch slide completely wrong.
Exhibited by:	TEST3D.IT
Fix:		Corrected sign error in vol. col pitch slide
		memory.
Comment:	Compare the relative pitch of the final two
		notes; the difference is much larger in MikAmp
		than in IT.
Severity:	Medium

Problem:	IT: SA0 ignored.
Exhibited by:	TEST12.IT
Fix:		Slight modification to OFFSET_LEGACY data format.
Severity:	Medium

Problem:	IT: Portamento with sample change is wrong.
Exhibited by:	TEST21.IT
Fix:		A little logarithm madness.
Severity:	Low

Problem:	S3M stereo/mono switch not implemented.
Severity:	Low

Problem:	DirectSound output driver occasionally
		scrambles output, especially with low latency.
Fix:		Changed driver to avoid overwriting currently
		playing data.
Severity:	High

Problem:	Reallocating sample table in virtch.c causes
		channel VINFO structs to have invalid sample
		pointers.
Severity:	High
Fix:		Changed getfreehandle to modify
		vc->vinf[x].handle for all 0<x<vc->numchn to
		point to the new VSAMPLE table.
Comment:	Previously reported as: "Multiplay crashes
		occasionally when loading files	when a file is
		already playing, especially with large .IT files."
		Does _not_ appear to be a multithreading problem;
		even if the next Mikmod_Update doesn't run
		until after the song has been Player_SongInit:ed,
		(I added some mutexes temporarily just to make sure)
		the whole things still crashes.
		This showed up in the same situations on both
		Multiplay and MikSDLPlay, so it had to be a
		MikMod bug.

Problem:	Effects delayed past the row change should not
		be executed.
Severity:	Low
Comment:	If an effect is delayed to or starts at tick x
		and x>=speed, the effect should be ignored, not
		delayed until the last tick in the row. I
		checked this using IT, ST3, FT2 and PT, using
		several different effects.

Problem:	Volume sliding (non-fine) on first tick:
		IT: Slide on first tick only when slide speed is F.
		S3M: Slide on first tick if slide speed is F or
		fast volume slides are on (fast volume slides
		implicit in version 3.00).
Severity:	Medium
Comment:	XM and PT: Never slide on first tick. This was
		correctly handled already.
		Apparently, this is a bug in the so-called
		corrected volume slide in ST3.20, because:
		- The ST3 docs don't mention the D0F/DF0
		  weirdness, but ST3 does it anyway.
		- IT always does it, "for S3M compatibility".

Problem:	S3M files saved by IT need to use IT "buggy"
		portamento, which retriggers notes.
Severity:	Low
Comment:	Impulse Tracker messes the portamento up even
		when importing/exporting S3Ms, so we check
		whether IT saved this one and screw it up just
		like IT does.

Problem:	IT: SAx commands should have no effect until
		an Oxx command is executed.
Severity:	Medium
Comment:	This caused PANIC.S3M to sound horrible; it
		sounds OK in IT despite its interpretation of
		the SAx command.

Problem:	IT, S3M: Oxx command should have memory.
Severity:	Low
Comment:	And SAx shouldn't affect Oxx's memory...

Problem:	IT: With old effects off, illegal sample offset
		commands should reset offset (high and low) to 0.
Exhibited by:	TEST22.IT
Severity:	Low

Problem:	XM: Fixed loader bug that zapped panning
		envelopes for no apparent reason.
Fix:		Swapped the check and assignment so that the
		variable that gets checked actually has a
		meaningful value.
Severity:	Medium
Comment:	Slump code, Jake?

Problem:	XM: Fixed loader bug that destroyed volume
		envelope position change in Lxx effect.
Severity:	Low
Comment:	More slump code?

Problem:	FT2 envelope position change (Lxx) effect should
		not affect pan envelope.
Severity:	Low
Comment:	As far as I can tell. On the other hand, ModPlug
		Tracker changes both volume and panning envelopes
		when handling XMs. Sigh. Why can't people check
		their code?

Problem:	669: Too many errors to mention.
Severity:	Medium
Comment:	669 effects should now work properly, except for
		the ridiculous extended 669 effect Hx, which
		seems to retrigger the note six times, but with
		a delay that can be set to be far smaller than
		the time between ticks. Needless to say, this
		makes it kind of hard to implement in MikMod.
		Likewise, the UNIS669 super-fast tempo (F0) is
		not implemented yet.

Old bugs:
---------

Problem:	S3M: Impulse Tracker's extra effects.
Exhibited by:	PANIC.S3M
Comment:	IT adds several effects to S3M that aren't in
		ST3. ModPlug Tracker also does this. Impulse
		Tracker identifies its files clearly (tracker
		version 0x3ijj, where i.jj is IT version), but
		ModPlug Tracker uses tracker ID 0x1320 (ST3.20).

		Anyway, we have three options:
		a) Deactivate Lim's extensions when playing
		   S3M:s not saved by Impulse Tracker. Problem:
		   corrupts ModPlug Tracker S3Ms that use IT-
		   style effects.
		b) Ignore it. Who would want to use an effect that
  		   doesn't do anything? Problem: corrupts ST3
		   S3Ms that use undefined commands.
		c) Deactivate Lim's extensions when playing S3Ms
		   that have a version number less than 3.20.
		   Problem: fixes only the oldest problem modules,
		   may cause problems if ModPlug Tracker uses
		   another identifier, lots of extra work.

		Whatever we do, someone's going to complain it's
		wrong. Maybe we should do it both ways and let
		the user decide.
Severity:	Low

Problem:	IT: Turning on envelopes should not reset
		envelope position.
Exhibited by:	TEST7.IT
Fix:		Need code to check whether this should be done.
Severity:	Low

Problem:	IT: Vibrato et.c. waveforms need checking.
Exhibited by:	TEST13.IT
Fix:		Careful testing to see what trackers use what
		waveforms.
Severity:	Low
Comment:	IT may have serious problems with consistency
		in tremolo. This makes checking tremolo waveforms
		minimal priority.

Problem:	IT: Tremolo seems to get reset on type change.
Exhibited by:	TEST15.IT
Fix:		Need code to check whether this should be done.
Severity:	Minimal
Comment:	Again, tremolo is quite uncommon, and if it's
		as buggy as it seems...

Problem:	S3M vol0 optimisation: if on, cut all (not just
		looping as documented) notes that have been at
		0 volume for three rows.
Fix:		More code!
Severity:	Low
Comment:	The whole concept of vol0 optimisation is a
		ghastly kludge. Any sane mixer should be able to
		optimise mixing of zero volume channels by itself.

Problem:	S3M, XM, IT: Volume setting on note delay processing
		not delayed.
Fix:		Lots of work...
Severity:	Low
Comment:	In IT note delay actually delays _everything_
		on the row, including volume/panning changes
		and volume column effects. In S3M, note delay
		can't affect other effects (only one effect
		at a time), but it does affect volume setting.
		In FT2, note delay affects volume setting
		(vol. col. 0 to 0x40), but not volume column
		effects (!), and the note is always rekicked
		even though no note or instrument is specified
		(sample, envelopes, pitch setting, the works).
		PT is simple enough to avoid this problem
		entirely.

Problem:	IT: Vol. col. effects not delayed by note delay.
Fix:		Lots of work...
Severity:	Low
Comment:	Yes, note delay actually delays _everything_
		on the row, including volume/panning changes
		and volume column effects. But in FT2, only
		the volume setting is delayed.

New bugs:
---------

Problem:	XM: Pitch changes made by volume column vibrato
		should not be reset until another operation
		touches the pitch setting for this channel.
Exhibited by:	TEST13D.XM
Fix:		If we keep sending vibrato depth commands
		(without the vibrato speed)
		until we reach a pitch bend, porta, new note
		or something, we should get the same result.
		In other words, we need tons of weird special
		logic. Not recommended.
Severity:	Minimal
Comment:	Wonderful. Looks like someone from Triton
		forgot to reset the pitch after the volume
		column vibrato ends. The effect column
		vibrato works fine.

		Of course, not a single XM-compatible tracker
		(AFAIK) emulates this bug, so any ModPlug users
		will be very surprised if we introduce this
		feature.

Problem:	XM: Set fine tune (E5x) should only affect
		notes starting on the same row.
Severity:	Minimal
Comment:	This certainly qualifies as obscure.

Problem:	UNIS669: Hx retrig effect not implemented.
Severity:	Minimal
Comment:	This effect seems to be able to retrigger more
		often than once a tick.
Fix:		Increase the tempo and decrease effect
		intensities to compensate (UNIS669 may be
		doing this itself).

Problem:	UNIS669: F0 super fast tempo not implemented.
Severity:	Minimal
Comment:	Unsure how fast this tempo is.

Bug severity criteria:
----------------------

Critical:	Causes most tunes to misplay badly.
		MikAmp crashes on many tunes.
High:		Causes most tunes to misplay somewhat or
		many tunes to misplay badly. Sporadic crashes
		in any major MikMod app caused by MikMod.
Medium:		Causes many tunes or a few famous tunes
		(especially anything by Purple Motion) to
		play incorrectly.
Low:		Minor glitches in a few tunes. Major
		glitches, but only in test files.
Minimal:	Only noticable in really twisted test files.

